N3209: Progress guarantees for C++0x (revised)
Doc. No.:
WG21/N3209
J16/10-0199
Date:
2010-11-11
Reply to:
Hans-J. Boehm, Pablo Halpern
Phone:
+1-650-857-3406
Email:
Hans.Boehm@hp.com, phalpern@halpernwightsoftware.com
N3209: Progress guarantees for C++0x (US 3 and US 186)(revised)
National body comment US 3 points out that the FCD makes no meaningful
progress guarantees for multithreaded C++ programs. US 186 points out that the
current try_lock specification allows the function to always spuriously fail,
again making it impossible for programmers to provide useful progress
guarantees.
The complaints are clearly correct; we say nothing about progress guarantees.
Many real applications will need to make some assumptions beyond the standard.
The question is whether we want to address this directly, or view it in the same
way that we currently view performance guarantees: as a quality of
implementation issue. The correct answer is not clear. Here we argue for a
fairly conservative solution that adds at most "normative encouragement" to the
specification. The arguments in favor of such a minimalist solution are
essentially:
It's late in the game.
We are not aware of any approach to specifying progress guarantees that is
painlessly applicable across the variety of platforms that are likely to want
to support C++0x. Any attempt to do something more substantial is likely to be
controversial.
It appears likely that providing a meaningful guarantee would necessitate
other changes in the library specification.
Our proposal implements the "normative encouragement" consensus that appeared
in Rapperswil, though one of us is mildly concerned that even this may be
stronger than appropriate.
Here we outline the difficulties in doing anything more substantial.
Difficulties in specifying progress guarantees
Here we list our concerns
with adding a hard progress guarantee specification. Essentially all of these
were previously discussed on the reflector. They also point to some of the
difficulties with providing very precise "normative encouragement".
Java previously considered this issue, and made only very minimal
guarantees. I believe Java guarantees that if I write (warning
pseudocode!) with x initially false and atomic (i.e. Java
volatile)
Thread 1
Thread 2
x = true;
print "hello";
...
while (!x) {}
and "hello" is
printed, then thread 2 terminates, i.e. the update to x can't be in
flight forever. We believe it makes no guarantee that "hello" is ever printed,
or the loop terminates if it's not. This was intentional. Everyone agreed that
a general purpose JVM should provide stronger guarantees. But it was argued
that it was fine for something like the Oracle embedded JVM that processes
stored procedures not to use fully preemptive scheduling, and thus this should
not be required in all contexts. We believe similar considerations apply for
C++ use in embedded systems. Some of us believe that the resulting formulation
at http://java.sun.com/docs/books/jls/third_edition/html/memory.html#17.4.9
is still a more complicated specification than we would like in the C++
standard.
The Java guarantee requires that atomic updates become visible to other
threads in finite amount of time. This would at least be far easier to
implement if hardware provided a similar guarantee, i.e. that values written
to a processor store buffer eventually become visible to other threads (even
if the processor then goes into a tight infinite loop, touching little
memory). To our current knowledge, not all major processor vendors have
committed to this, making it unclear what an implementation needs to look like
in order to absolutely guarantee this.
US 3 really wants a stronger guarantee than (my interpretation of) Java,
namely that the above loop above actually terminate no matter what, i.e. that
thread 1 is scheduled and the new value of x eventually becomes
visible to thread 2. This is not going to be enforceable on systems with
strict priorities in which there might be a single processor, and thread 2
might always have higher priority than thread 1. Since C++0x does not provide
priorities, this is not a show-stopper. But it does mean that progress
guarantees would have to be weakened if we added priorities in the future. And
it means that we would be providing a guarantee that cannot be assumed by
library writers on most current systems. For example, a library intended to be
callable from an arbitrary pthreads thread should not spin-wait on a helper
thread with normal priority, since the helper thread may never be scheduled.
We would be guaranteeing that this works.
We suspect that an MxN thread implementation along the lines that Solaris
traditionally provided wouldn't satisfy the requested guarantee either in all
contexts. But we're not sure about this.
If we want to guarantee progress for all unblocked threads, what does this
mean for a thread that occasionally acquires a lock, perhaps as an
implementation detail in some library routine? Is it required to eventually
acquire the lock if it is available infinitely often? This would effectively
require some level of fairness for locks, which may be at odds with
performance. Any progress guarantee without such a guarantee seems nearly
vacuous, unless we restrict which library routines may acquire locks.
Lock implementations sometimes use a briefly held spin lock to protect the
internal data structures of the lock. Any real notion of fairness seems
unattainable if an unlucky thread can repeatedly fail to acquire this spin
lock, as appears likely in such a setting.
Thus imposing an absolute requirement here is tricky, and may be
inappropriate for some settings. The normative encouragement option suggested by
US16 as a possible alternative seems much more palatable.
Try_lock spurious failures
If we choose not to provide hard progress guarantees for the C++ threads in
general, there are fewer reasons to say anything about try_lock()
spurious failures.
It can still be argued that some legitimate algorithms could rely on the fact
that try_lock() failed to obtain useful failures. One example, due to
the authors of US 186, is that a graph traversal algorithm might legitimately
conclude that if a lock on a node is held by another traversal thread, this node
is already being visited by another thread, and hence no further work needs to
be done.
However, it appears to us that such algorithms can almost always be more
simply rewritten using the atomics library. A graph traversal algorithm
typically already needs a flag to indicate whether a node has been visited. If
that flag is made atomic, rather than protected by a lock, it can also easily be
used to detect an in-progress traversal and ensure that exactly one thread
processes each node, if that is desired.
On the other hand, there are strong reasons to require that programs be
written to tolerate spurious try_lock() failures:
As pointed out in Boehm, Adve,
"Foundations of the C++ Concurrency Memory Model", PLDI 08, enforcing
sequential consistency for data-race-free programs without spurious
try_lock() failures requires significantly stronger memory ordering
for lock() operations on try_lock()-compatible mutex types.
On some architectures that significantly increases the cost of uncontended
mutex acquisitions. This cost appears to greatly outweigh any benefit from
prohibiting spurious try_lock() failures.
It allows a user-written try_lock() to fail if, for example, the
implementation fails to acquire a low-level lock used to protect the mutex
data structure. Or it allows such an operation to be written directly in terms
of compare_exchange_weak.
It ensures that client code remains correct when, for example, a debugging
thread is introduced that occasionally acquires locks in order to be able to
read consistent values from a data structure being checked or examined. Any
code that obtains information from try_lock() failure would break
with the introduction of another thread that purely locks and reads the data
structure.
(All of these were brought out in the reflector discussion that also included
Herb Sutter, Bronek Kozicki, Lawrence Crowl.)
On the other hand, we would like to discourage implementations from
generating actual spurious failures of try_lock() when they could be
avoided, since those introduce performance problems. And we want to make it
clear that a try_lock() implementation that always fails is not useful.
Thus we propose either normative encouragement, or a note, to explicitly
discourage such implementations.
Proposed resolution:
We propose wording that provides normative
encouragement to address both issues. We are not sure (with some mild
disagreement among the authors) whether this requirement can even be stated
precisely enough for normative encouragement. An alternative is to move all or
some of the normative text into notes. We propose to add after 1.10p1
[intro.multithread]:
Implementations should ensure that all unblocked threads
eventually make forward progress. [Note: Standard library functions may
silently block on I/O or locks. Factors in the execution environment,
including externally-imposed thread priorities, may prevent an implementation
from making certain guarantees of forward progress. -- end note]
We also propose to add at the end of 1.10 [intro.multithread]:
An implementation should ensure that the last value (in
modification order) assigned by an atomic or synchronization operation will
become visible to all other threads in a finite period of time.
Recall that it is currently unclear whether existing hardware
easily supports this as a hard guarantee. But a lot of existing software would
not work well if the guarantee were frequently violated. (Note that the
corresponding property for ordinary objects is not observable without
introducing a data race.)
And finally add at the end of 30.4.1p14 [thread.mutex.requirements]
An implementation should ensure that try_lock() does not
consistently return false in the absence of contending mutex
acquisitions.
(Does "should" make sense in a requirements table like this? I think it is OK
to apply to user-defined implementations, as well as the built-in mutex types.
It will in fact apply to only the built-in mutex types if the lockable
requirements paper goes in, to both if it doesn't. This is is too vague and
untestable to be a "shall" requirement.)
For consistency, add to the compare_exchange_weak specification
[atomics.types.operations] 29.6p23, just before the note:
Implementations should ensure that weak compare-and-exchange
operations do not consistently return false unless either the atomic object
has value different from expected, or there are concurrent
modifications to the atomic object.
By stating these explicitly, we preserve our options, but potentially avoid
some misunderstandings.
